preamble:draft
Titre: Automatic Categorization of Author Gender via N-Gram Analysis
Auteur: Jonathan Doyle
Resumé de l'article: We present a method for automatic categorization of author gender via n-gram analysis. Using a corpus of British student essays, experiments using character-level, wordlevel, and part-of-speech n-grams are performed. The peak accuracy for all methods is roughly equal, reaching a maximum of 81%. These results are on par with other, established techniques, while retaining the simplicity and ease-of-generalization inherent in n-gram techniques.
There are different subtasks of text classification and they can be divided into topic-based
and non-topic-based classification. The traditional text classification is topic-based and
a typical example is news classification. Recently, there has been an increasing activity in
the area of non-topic classification as well, e.g.,
in sub-tasks such as
1. genre classification (Finn and Kushmerick, 2003), (E. Stamatatos and Kokkinakis, 2000),
2. sentiment classification,
3. spam identification,
4. language and encoding identification, and
5. authorship attribution and plagiarism detection (Khmelev and Teahan, 2003).
Many algorithms have been invented for assessing the authorship of a given text. These
algorithms rely on the fact that authors use linguistic devices at every level—semantic, syntactic, lexicographic, orthographic and morphological (Ephratt, 1997)—to produce their

text. Typically, such devices are applied unconsciously by the author, and thus provide
a useful basis for unambiguously determining
authorship. The most common approach to
determining authorship is to use stylistic analysis that proceeds in two steps: first, specific style markers are extracted, and second,
a classification procedure is applied to the resulting description. These methods are usually
based on calculating lexical measures that represent the richness of the author’s vocabulary
and the frequency of common word use (Stamatatos et al., 2001). Style marker extraction
is usually accomplished by some form of nontrivial NLP analysis, such as tagging, parsing
and morphological analysis. A classifier is then
constructed, usually by first performing a nontrivial feature selection step that employs mutual information or Chi-square testing to determine relevant features.
However, there are several disadvantages of
this standard approach. First, techniques used
for style marker extraction are almost always
language dependent, and in fact differ dramatically from language to language. For example,
an English parser usually cannot be applied to
German or Chinese. Second, feature selection
is not a trivial process, and usually involves
setting thresholds to eliminate uninformative
features (Scott and Matwin, 1999). These decisions can be extremely subtle, because although rare features contribute less signal than
common features, they can still have an important cumulative effect (Aizawa, 2001). Third,
current authorship attribution systems invariably perform their analysis at the word level.
However, although word level analysis seems
to be intuitive, it ignores the fact that morphological features can also play an important
role, and moreover that many Asian languages
such as Chinese and Japanese do not have word
boundaries explicitly identified in text. In fact,

word segmentation itself is a difficult problem in Asian languages, which creates an extra
level of difficulty in coping with the errors this
process introduces. Additionally, the number
of authors is small in all reported experiments,
so the size of author-specific information is not
an issue. If the number of authors, or classes in
general, is large, we have to set a limit on the
author-specific information, i.e., on the author
profile.
In this paper, we propose a simple method
that avoids each of these problems.
Two important operations are:
1. choosing the optimal set of n-grams to be
included in the profile, and
2. calculating the similarity between two
profiles.
The approach does not depend on a specific
language, and it does not require segmentation
for languages such as Chinese or Thai. There
is no any text preprocessing or higher level processing required for character or word n-grams,
while the most complicated NLP tool used being a part-of-speech tagger used in two of the
experiments.
The small profile size is not important only
for efficiency reasons, but it is also a natural
mechanism for over-fitting control.

Bibliography:
 A. Aizawa. 2001. Linguistic techniques to improve
 the performance of automatic text categorization. In Proceedings 6th NLP Pac. Rim Symp.
 NLPRS-01.
 Shlomo Argamon, Moshe Koppel, Jonathan Fine,
 and Anat Rachel Shimoni. 2003. Gender, genre,
 and writing style in formal written texts. Text,
 23(3):321–346.
 W. Cavnar and J. Trenkle. 1994. N-gram-based
 text categorization. In Proceedings SDAIR-94.
 Shyamala Doraisamy and Stefan Ruger. 2003.
 Robust polyphonic music retrieval with ngrams. Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, 21(1):53–70, July.
 N. Fakotakis E. Stamatatos and G. Kokkinakis.
 2000. Automatic text categorization in terms
 of genre and author. Computational Linguistics,
 26(4):471–495.
 M. Ephratt. 1997. Authorship attribution - the
 case of lexical innovations. In Proc. ACH-ALLC97.
 Aidan Finn and Nicholas Kushmerick.
 2003.
 Learning to classify documents according to
 genre. In IJCAI-03 Workshop on Computational
 Approaches to Style Analysis and Synthesis.
 Stephen M. Harding, W. Bruce Croft, and C. Weir.
 1997. Probabilistic retrieval of ocr degraded text
 using n-grams. Probabilistic Retrieval of OCR
 Degraded Text Using N-Grams, 1324:345–359.
 M. Mahoui I. Witten, Z. Bray and W. Teahan.
 1999. Text mining: A new frontier for lossless
 compression. In Proceedings of the IEEE Data
 Compression Conference (DCC).
 Vlado Keselj, Fuchun Peng, Nick Cercone, and
 Calvin Thomas. 2003. N-gram-based author
 profiles for authorship attribution. Proceedings
 of the Conference Pacific Association for Computational Linguistics PACLING’03, August.
 D. Khmelev and W. Teahan. 2003. A repetition
 based measure for verification of text collections
 and for text categorization. In SIGIR’2003,
 Toronto, Canada.
 Moshe Koppel, Shlomo Argamon, and Anat Rachel
 Shimoni. 2002. Automatically categorizing written texts by author gender. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 17(4):401–412.
 Hilary Nesi, Gerard Sharpling, and Lisa
 Ganobcsik-Williams. 2004. Student papers
 across the curriculum: Designing and developing a corpus of british student writing.
 Computers and Composition, 21(4):439–450.
 R. Rickman and P. Rosin. 1996. Content-based
 image retrieval using colour n-grams. IEEE Colloquium on Intelligent Image Databases, pages
 15/1–15/6.
 S. Scott and S. Matwin. 1999. Feature engineering
 for text classification. In Proceedings ICML-99.
 E. Stamatatos, N. Fakotakis, and G. Kokkinakis.
 2001. Computer-based authorship attribution
 without lexical measures. Computers and the
 Humanities, 35:193–214.
 J. Cleary T. Bell and I. Witten. 1990. Text Compression. Prentice Hall.
 Ying Zhao and Justin Zobel. 2005. Effective
 and scalable authorship attribution using function words. The 2nd Asia Information Retrieval
 Symposium.
